# Tri-Reagent/Direct-zol RNA Isolation Protocol

This protocol has been refined for use of RNA extraction from field collected whole avian blood samples preserved in RNAlater or DNA/RNA Shield buffers which were then stored in a -80 °C freezer. 

## Before starting:
- Clean work area
- Gather all supplies
- Set centrifuge to 4°C 
- Wipe tools, equipment, and fume hood work space with RNase Away/ RNase Zap or similar product
- Grab cold bead bucket
- Aliquot required amount of 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane (100 μl per sample and hold on ice)
 
### Supplies: 
- Bucket of ice or cold beads
- Tri Reagent: 1ml per sample (Tri Reagent and Trizol are interchangeable, except that 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane or Chloroform may be used with Tri Reagent while only Chloroform is compatible with Trizol. Chloroform is more toxic and volatile then 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane)
- 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane as the phase separation agent: 100 ul per sample (Chloroform if used is 200 ul per sample)
- RNA free tubes 1.7 or 2.0 ml for Tri-Reagent phase seperation (for final elution and quality control aliquots)
- Direct-zol RNA Miniprep Plus contents (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA, Cat# R2070 or R2071 supplied with Tri-Reagent)
- 3-5 mm steel beads (clean with RNAase and then with Isopropanol, let air dry on kim wipes), or tissuelyzer or other power homogenizer
- RNAase away
- 100% Ethanol
- Access to a fume hood, Tri Reagent and 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane should be handeled in a fume hood 

### Disposal guidelines:
- Tri-Reagent, 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane, and Directzol RNA Pre wash buffer are toxic and must not go in the trash or down the drain.
- Pour all such waste into appropriate “biohazard container”  and follow appropriate local hazardous waste disposal guidelines.

#### Sample Preparation and Phase Separation
1. For whole blood sample preparation:
	- For blood stored in RNALater or DNA/RNA Shield preservatives: Take up 30-100 μl of the blood/RNA preservative. A higher volume (if available) will give greater RNA yields and will aid in downstream cDNA library construction. Centrifuge your 30-100 μl aliquot for 1 min at 5,000 - 8,000 x g. This will lightly pellet the blood and allow you to remove a significant proportion of the RNALater. You may leave some RNALater behind (it is ok for some to carry over) to homogenize the blood cell pellet and ease pipetting this mixture. It is not recommended to leave more than ~20 μl RNA preservative.
	- Dispense the pelleted and concentrated blood/RNALater mix directly into 500 μl Tri-Reagent in a 1.7 ml tube along with a sterile steel bead, close tube cap, and immediately vortex for 30 seconds. Add remaining 500 μl Tri-Reagent.
	- Vortex to mix for 30 seconds, then homogenize or use side or other attachment to vortex at room temperature for 10 minutes.
	- 
Below Phase separtion steps adapted from Tri Reagent Protocol https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/US/en/technical-documents/protocol/protein-biology/protein-lysis-and-extraction/tri-reagent
2. Phase Separation:
	- Add 100 μl cold 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane (or 200 μl chloroform), shake vigorously for 20 seconds, then incubate at room temperature 10-15 minutes. 
	- On the cold centrifuge spin at 4°C  for 30-60 minutes at 12,000 x g (or max speed).
	- Check phase separation: 50-60% of the volume should be clear aqueous phase. If separation is poor, add an additional 100 μl 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane (or 200 μl chloroform) and repeat shake-incubate-spin step. Centrifugation separates the mixture into 3 phases:  a colorless upper aqueous phase containing total RNA, an interphase containing DNA, and the red organic phase containing proteins.
	- Carefully collect up to 500 μl of the aqueous phase, making sure not to disturb interphase or lower organic phase, and place in clean tube. 
 
Below taken from Zymo Directzol Miniprep Protocol Page # 7 https://files.zymoresearch.com/protocols/_r2070t_r2070_r2071_r2072_r2073_direct-zol_rna_miniprep_plus_kit.pdf 
#### RNA Purification
All centrifugation steps should be performed at 10,000-16,000 x g for 30 seconds unless specified otherwise.  
1. Add an equal volume ethanol (95-100%) to aqueous phase collected (500ul). 
2. Transfer the mixture into a Zymo-Spin IIICG Column in a collection ube and centrifuge. Transfer the column into a new collection tube and discard the flow-through. 
3. Recommended: DNase I treatment (in-column)3 
	(3a)  Add 400 μl RNA Wash Buffer to the column and centrifuge. 
	(3b)  In an RNase-free tube, add 5 μl DNase I (6 U/μl)*, 75 μl DNA Digestion Buffer and mix. Add the mix 
		directly to the column matrix. 
	(3c)  Incubate at room temperature (20-30°C) for 15 minutes. Proceed to step 4. 
4. Add 400 μl Direct-zol RNA PreWash to the column and centrifuge. Discard the flow-through and repeat this step. 
5. Add 700 μl RNA Wash Buffer to the column and centrifuge for 2 minutes to ensure complete removal of the wash buffer. Transfer the column carefully into an RNase-free tube. 
6. To elute RNA, add 100 or 50 μl (for highly concentrated RNA) of DNase/RNase-Free Water directly to the column matrix and centrifuge.
7. Aliquot 2.5 ul of RNA for quantitation into strip tubes. Use 1 μl for Qubit, 1 μl for Bioanalyzer, with the remaining 0.5 μl to account for pipetting error. Store RNA in -80°C. 
